

## Network generation methods using graph theory and machine learning for large-scale simulation models
Agent-based network models(ABNM) are suitable for simulating individual-level dynamics of infectious diseases. However, as ABNM simulates a scaled-version of the full population, consisting of all infected and susceptible persons, they are computationally infeasible for studying certain questions in low prevalence, such as during new or re-emerging disease outbreaks, or slower spreading diseases such as HIV, Hepatistis C, or Tuberculosis. For e.g., simulating 100,000 nodes to represent the U.S. population would generate only 400 people with HIV. We developed an Evolving Contact Network Algorithm, combining  network theories with machine learning, to simulate networks of only infected persons and immediate contacts and thus dynamically evolve the network as the infection spreads. 

## Cluster generation algorithm for early detection and response
Molecular analyses, using nucleotide sequences of the virus from persons diagnosed with an infection, can identify clusters or groups of infections that are genetically very similar. Thus, they help detect disease outbreaks, and measure growth, and help rapidly response. However molecular analysis is limited to persons who are diagnosed and have a sequence, and thus, generate only partially observable sub-networks of full networks. We developed mathematical models that generates the clusters and the underlying full network, specifically a cluster generation algorithm  generates clusters replicative of those observed using molecular data and maps clusters to the full transmission network. Using  molecular methods for early detection and the model for understanding true size of network could further help with rapid response and optimal response. 
